---
title: Identity and Violence
---

# Identity and Violence

*On Amartya Sen's "Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny"*

I wish Mr. Sen chose his subtitle for his title. "The Illusion of
Destiny" sums up his effort in telling brevity. I could imagine the
mad genius of a Nietzsche coining this – perhaps in ironic rebuttal of
some Hegel.

Mr. Sen's long essay advocates a soporific world beyond the ugliness
of clash and tussle. And there is the rub. This book in spite of all
its empirical detail is a prescription, not a description. The
fundamental prescription is: "global civil society". Whoever would
care to consider such ambition, selfless and grand as it is, dreamy?

Mr. Sen, rightly rejects single identities. You are not merely a
Bengali, or a biologist, or a homosexual, or a member of your tennis
club, or music lover, or a Christian or much else. You are rather all
of these simultaneously. From these evidently right premises, Mr. Sen
rushes forward to a wide conclusion: since everybody is thus so
palpably diverse, why be a convert to some set and unique destiny, why
seek particular identity, singular and mock, why not bury our several
and conflicting hatchets, why indulge in so many fanaticisms, why not
let vanish the illusion of destiny?

This indeed is a clarion call, a great sermon – if you are prepared to
forget, as Mr. Sen obviously is, that our many identities nonetheless
obey a hierarchy of priorities. And there is the snag. Your being an
angler and an Arab can and does bring you in admirably close quarters
to an angler who is a Jew. But in serious crises, when ruffians riot
and your very existence trembles, you are, so hopelessly often, an
Arab or a Jew at first count – and not an angler or chess
enthusiast. And many elements frame the fabric of this preference:
your history, your language, what you look like, whether you visit a
mosque or a church or neither.  You may very well be nice to the
children in your neighbourhood; but if a bomb were to explode, you
will automatically seek to save YOUR children first and not your golf
partner's. And the mob does rage, civilizations do
clash. (Incidentally, Samuel Huntington, Mr. Sen’s favourite
antagonist, does not pre-require sharp and distinct separations of
civilizations for them to clash). In crises, what clinches the issue
is not the exclusivity of some certain difference but its
predominance: You are what he is not. Amidst all fraternity, animosity
often rules the waves.

Each of us normally has a paltry sliver of experience. Brotherhood of
man is a charming agenda as long as you are no immediate witness to
fear and death. But if we were to throw open our windows wide we shall
witness a desultory state of affairs - here in Europe today, and
elsewhere:

There are schools in Berlin with zero – I repeat zero – non-Muslim
children, the last few having been mobbed out. Arab Muslim students,
all from affluent families, none a poor down-trodden Palestinian, left
Hamburg to launch attacks on the twin towers.

Islamist terrorists bombed and maimed in London, in Madrid, in Paris,
Egypt and Bali – to quote but a few instances. For his anti-Islamist
film the Dutch film maker Theo van Gogh was knifed on the streets –
not of Rawalpindi but – of Amsterdam.

I could make the list longer, much longer – or very short, were I to
borrow Mr. Sen's dignified euphemism "accentuated religiosity" to
summarize all horrors in a word. In which quarters of which town does
Mr. Sen live, I wonder. Perhaps only hilarity can bear the absurdity
of Mr. Sen’s diagnosis here.

Let us have a brief look at Mr. Sen contrasting economies. Mr. Sen
loathes Mr. Huntington's credo "cultures count". In the sixties,
Huntington says, Ghana's and Korea's economies were quite
similar. Thirty years later the gap is staggering. And Huntington does
put it down in a way to "differences in culture". Mr. Sen stoops to
concede there is a gap. But the gap comes from better education,
closer relations to the United States etc. But he would have none of
this "culture" stuff. Interesting though, is what Mr. Sen chooses not
to mention; namely, culture or not, the stultifying influence, in
Ghana as once in India, of the dogma: the state will manage
it. Mr. Nehru, if I remember right, called the hideous mess he
fathered "democratic socialism". And this socialism explains India's,
and Ghana's, having long remained captive to utter destitution. India
has always had a significant business class. But business or not, the
country was severely married – as in foreign policy, so too in economy
– to the dying Soviet Union, then already malodorous.

Mr. Sen's prose is succinct and mercifully undramatic –
notwithstanding the depth and compass of his crusade. He it seems is
quite fond of the term "dialectic", of the person M. Gandhi and of the
institution United Nations. Well, all that is his choice. It is man
butchering man, children starving and full of AIDS, flourishing
billionaires and raped, burned and slaughtered Sudan that have made
Mr. Sen so vocal in his anguish, in his despair.

But he does not halt at anguish. "An elderly adult's" journey proceeds
to light, to harmony. Is there any at the end of our day, in
humankind's tomorrow? He says here a confident "yes". No matter how
remorselessly human history shows the obverse. Salvational hope binds
us to a grand vision, to our common destiny.

But there is a dilemma here, in this vision's immanent teleology, a
teleology that Mr. Sen is so eager to reject. Because your teleologist
would point out that destiny shaped, and not inherited, is destiny
nonetheless.
