---
title: A Reticent Requiem
---

# A Reticent Requiem

*Nine Reasons Why Tagore Is Largely Unknown Beyond Bengal*
	
Robindronath Thakur (Tagore) is a millennial figure in Bengal’s
history. Wealthy and aristocratic, he was born in Calcutta in the
second half of the 19th century. The mutiny in some native ranks of
the British Army had just ended. After some gruesome excesses by both
sides the uprising was finally crushed. The Crown, Queen Victoria at
the time, formally took over direct control of Britain’s territories,
no longer ready to rule by proxy through the high offices of the East
India Company.

Thakur’s formal schooling was short. He was sent in his youth to
England, came back, fell in love – if I see it right – with the
attractive wife of one of his several brothers who seems to have
returned the affection. He was married young. His marriage caused(?)
his sister-in-law to end her life. Sixty long years thereafter, he is
said to have desired on his deathbed to see a photo of his first
love. In vain, I am told, because none could be salvaged. The two, I
hope, have come together in heaven. If, then however with the assured
snag of intimate encounters – the end of all cosmic tranquility, I am
afraid.

Thakur wrote much, apparently without either weariness or pause. He
covered every area of literature. In the early 1900s his fame reached
the West – with the English translation of a slim volume of
lyrics. Yeats, Pound and several others were fascinated, not the least
due to their own urge towards things mystic, an urge whose final
fulfilment they surely felt to have seen in Thakur’s poetry. Thakur
came to Europe, met the people you meet and quickly became famous.
Even the nice old gentleman who ran the heating at my first students’
hostel in Heidelberg inquired in detail, now that he knew me to be a
Bengali, of the same tongue as Thakur.

The crest of his fame coincided with his Nobel Prize in 1913. And his
fame then evaporated equally quickly. Yeats, by now obviously bored,
later commented, the language is mediocre, Thakur’s own translations
stale – that, incidentally, was not much off the mark – and that
Indians’ grip of English was unfirm.

Our title is meant to imply: he ought to be better known. Well, why
so? His having won the Nobel prize is neither necessary nor sufficient
claim to greatness, not even in places where his language, Bangla, is
native to; let alone elsewhere. Consider the list of winners for
literature in the last sixty years. How many could you name, how many
have you read a line of? I should, I dare say, fail badly if called
upon.

Greatness is not born in lists. There are no norms for becoming
great. You know it when you see it. Like watching Maradona play
football. It mercifully demands no definition. You know it when it
grips the very sinews of your consciousness tight.

One mark of greatness though is that it is rare. You do not – and
cannot – have it in abundance. The creator(s?) of the Mohabharot, the
Iliad, the Old Testament, Dante, the Shakespeare of Lear and Macbeth,
the Eliot of the Lyrics. And certainly others. Your choice will not
completely coincide with mine; but most would agree on where the
journey is going to. Thakur beyond doubts should be very much a part
of this grand journey. But he is not.

Why not?

1. **Bengal's Irrelevance**  
   His Bengal, when it comes to military or economic strength, has long
   been quite insignificant in the affairs of states. And this sort of
   significance matters. The Bengali essayist Buddhodeb Bose once
   remarked in frustration while at American universities that
   lorry-loads of papers were being regularly (the 1960s) produced on
   Yevtushenko and that no one was aware of Thakur. And it should be
   clear, why not. The Great Cold War was raging (in fact the second
   World War. The Second was in fact the First, and the one called
   First was none, a European civil war of nations). I am quite sure
   Yevtushenko is today pretty much forgotten – notwithstanding his
   definite merits at damningly exposing Soviet Bolshevism’s genocidal
   atrocities visited upon Soviet Jews. I presume that instead a
   phalanx of Chinese literary figures is now being pampered in the
   USA.

2. **English Translation**  
   Translations, the gateway to both transnational and sustained
   appreciation, have not, as far as I can see, served Thakur
   well. And, incidentally, he should better have put his fingers
   firmly away from translating his poetry. However, since my
   judgement is bound by my horizon, I leave it for You to judge.
    
3. **Magnum Opus**  
   Thakur does not seem to have any. But greatness demands one. Were
   Shakespeare to have written a dozen Merry Wives of Windsor or
   Comedies of Errors, or Taming of Shrews, his claims upon posterity
   would have been thin. But he did not stop at those. He came up with
   his Macbeth. Thakur’s ‘Shyama’ for instance is to my mind of
   timeless beauty. But it is a musical, meant more to be heard than
   read. So too was Macbeth. But in Shyama what overwhelms us are the
   songs (heard), in Macbeth the awesome poetry of the play (read).
   
   Thakur wrote a number of novels. None quite stands out, I
   believe. *"Gora"*, almost great, is spoilt by over-talking. Were
   Thakur to have published a selection (no collection) of his short
   stories in translations done by native speakers, my notes here
   would surely be superfluous.
   
4. **Songs**  
   Thakur composed some two thousand songs. Many serene, majestic,
   ethereal, sublime.  And the poetry of the text often outweighs the
   melody. And there is the rub.  A Cantata from Bach or a Gregorian
   Chorale does carry words too. But what enthrals is the tone, not
   the word. With Thakur it is often the other way round. This
   preponderance is equally legitimate. Only, that words are naturally
   bound to their native semantics. And so the world beyond is hardly
   accessible.

5. **The Mystique**  
   Thakur’s fame and its end were a great misunderstanding. That
   mystic-nebulous something, that ethereal love seeking the proximity
   of God or Man or both, that dash of the Spiritual suspected in
   every corner – all this, I think, is not essential to great and
   timeless poetry. Remember that frustrated young man who once
   approached Malarme´, seeking solace at his having ‘grand ideas’ but
   being nevertheless bereft of great lyric?  Upon this Malarme´ is
   supposed to have suggested consolation in his dictum: great poetry
   is not written with ideas, rather with words. And precisely hence
   is great poetry largely untranslatable

6. **Words Overflowing**  
   Thakur seems never to have allowed himself a respite. Less would
   have been more – all the more so since he has countless jewels
   strewn amidst this over-abundance. And so many of his essays, plays
   and novels, dripping profundity, are a trifle tiring. I am
   confident, an extremely judicious way of pulling him out of his
   popularity-trough in the West, would be a selection of his best
   lyrics and prose – short, to start with.

7. **Blind Homage**  
   Perpetual tributes and unbridled canonization were not exactly fit to
   encourage critical reflexion in the poet.

8. **Evil**  
   There is palpable absence of *evil* in Thakur. I am not quite as
   confident of my diagnosis here as in 1-7 above, because I am unsure
   whether literary greatness is indeed pale without the creation of
   *evil*. In the Mohabharot, in the Old Testament, in Lady Macbeth we
   see fathomless, inhuman, subterranean *evil*. I hesitate to claim
   the Iliad too has such. But then it has its remorselessness of Man
   and the Gods. And Thakur, with the possible exception of his
   drawings, stops way short of evoking grand *evil* which robs the
   soul, he stops way short of the Dantesque.

9. **Untranslatability**  
   Thakur, great as he is, is supreme foremost in his poetry. And the
   finest in and of poetry is nearly untranslatable precisely because
   it is not written with thoughts but with words (Cf. 5. above).  And
   therefore again is great poetry largely untranslatable. Thakur
   wrote, more so in his later years, poetry slender, exquisite,
   resplendent in a cosmos beyond the transient; poetry though, that
   turns indifferent in translation. Here a few examples of my
   translation of Thakur (sorry, in German). The original, I am sure,
   counts among literature’s grandest jewels – but irrevocably suffers
   in translation:

    > sudur kon nodir pare [...]
    >
    > An welch fernem Fluss  
    > Bei welch undurchdringlichem Wald  
    > In welch tiefem Dunkel  
    > Überquerst Du  
    > Lebensfreund, Gefährte, Oh Du meiner.  
    > Heute, in der Sturmnacht,  
    > Der Sturmnacht meiner Deiner.
	
    > ushar udoy somo onobogunthita, tumi okunthita [...]
    >
    > Unverschleiert, unverklemmt – wie der Sonnenaufgang.
	
    > dekhi tumi noto shire bunicho poshom [...]  
    >
	> Erblicke Dich, Kopf geneigt  
    > Du strickst  
    > Der Schöpfung unfehlbaren Frieden anerkennend.
	
	> dusshomoy: jodio sondha [...]
	>
	> Die Dämmerung naht, still, bar aller Umkehr  
    > Der Gesang versiegt, alles so  plötzlich stumm  
    > Der Kosmos grenz'los, einsam öd und leer  
    > Welch Erschöpfung hallt im Körper drum  
	> Angst unsagbar, voller Erwartung, wortlos  
    > Horizont lichtfern, verhüllt in schwarzem Schleier  
	> Dennoch, Du Vogel, Lebensvogel, bloß  
	> End nicht schon Dein Flügelschlages Dauer

    > prohor sesher aloy ranga shedin coitromash  
	> tomar choke dekhechilem amar sorbonash
	>	
	> Rot war auch des Aprils fahllichtige Dämmerung  
	> Vernichtung sah ich, in deiner Augen Widerspiegelung
