---
title: Germany's Geography
---

# Germany's Geography

> states do not have friends,  
> only intererests

**Abstract**

Germany’s history is a child of Germany’s geography. The truth of this
heredity, blurred by the Cold War, is emerging with ever greater
clarity. But the natural indolence of the Cold War vintage hampers
defining and planning the nation’s purpose and strategy anew. The
handling of vital affairs often looks unsure and fortuitous. Only
honest and steadfast national self-interest, firmly rooted in the
West, worlds away from hypocracy or arrogance and married to the
awareness of the necessity of nations being in dialogue, will deliver
the goods – steady security and stable affluence within a confident
neighbourhood of nations.

**Geohistory**

Geography haunts Germany. Were it but possible for Germany to steer
clear of the continental land-mass and place itself in, say, some
placid mid-Atlantic havens west of Ireland, it were foolish not to
try. But that is by all accounts not to be.

Short of that, the German nations-State’s “grand strategy” cannot but
be a perrennial effort to overcome this “great flaw”. Canada is
supposed to have, as the wry saying goes: ‘too much geography and too
little history’. For Germany geography *is* history, is destiny. No
other major nation excepting perhaps Russia sits so utterly in the
midst of everybody else. And nearly every attempt to alter the
nation’s boundaries has ended in failure - and in cataclysm.

Obviously, the thing is not to reverse the “great flaw” but to arrest
it. Chancellor Bismarck, who built and shaped the German nation-state,
was a master at living up to his country’s geography. With surefooted
ease he negotiated the precarious trapeze between the then European
great powers – Russia, France, England, Prussia and Austria. And he
succeeded.

But the spectre sneaked in this very success. First, the ingenuity of
Bismarck in sustaining a balance of power lulled lesser mortals into
believing this balancing was permanently and comfortably
attainable. Second, this elusive stability in external affairs coupled
with rapid industrial growth and rising societal cohesion in Germany
at the turn into the twentieth century encouraged a fatal
overestimation of German power. Emerging German strength ws now
predominant in Europe – but only if pitted against the rest one at a
time, not all at once. In retrospect, this silly oversight would be
banal – but for the sombre consequences.

**The Adenauer Revolution**

Chancellor Adenauer changed all that. As the first chancellor of the
Federal Republic surveyed the carnage he saw a nation lying in
unfathomable ruins. Worse, the shock of moral defeat weighed down upon
the nation debilitating its every effort to begin anew. So confronted,
Adenauer opted for a threefold course of action:

1. to start with, keep the lid tight on the Pandora’s box Auschwitz;
   at the least, do not encourage its opening right away.
2. let the physical task of rebuilding the country be the logic of the
   infant Federal Republic's very existence.
3. correct the 'flaw' in Germany's geography.

And success in this third task is Adenauer’s lasting legacy to German
history. Today, after the passage of two generations, it is of petty
consequence to delve into the question as to whether this was
Adenauer’s carefully thought out strategy or whether he rather
stumbled upon the solution. The truth of the matter is that he
achieved these:

1. he gave up Bismarckian balancing – Germany was hardly in a position to balance anyway
2. he smoothed his people’s reconciliation to the surrender of vast
   territories east of the river Oder to Poland and to the Soviet
   Union
3. he ignored Stalin’s alleged proposal of barter – unity against
   neutrality
4. he brought Germany West.

Thus West-integration, not mere West-orientation, will surely stand
out in history as Chancellor Adenauer’s greatest achievement. And the
surest mark of greatness in the solution he supplied lies in its
elegant simplicity, a simplicity born of wisdom. Today, Germany’s
being in the West, no more an unsure colossus glancing at Central
Europe, is normal and banal to the extent of being trivial to most of
its affluent youth. So complete indeed has been the Adenauer
Revolution.

Having said that, one may legitimately point out the three factors
which made Adenauer’s task bearable:

1. a truncated country: more than emotional or intellectual, the
   journey West was a physical reality. Eastern and Central Germany
   were carved out and now provided outer ramparts to the Soviet
   Empire. The one great symbol of the Reich, Berlin, was
   gone. Millions of refugees travelled west carrying despair and
   destitution.
2. the USA, the great anchor: the obvious rescue for this lurching
   ship lay in the United States. Not in the general vagueness of some
   mythical West but, solely and specifically in the United
   States. None else would then have had either the desire or the
   muscle to prop Germany up socially, economically, politically and,
   above all, morally.
3. the focus of the novel US strategy: after the Second War the United
   States did not go home – as after the first. The urge for splendid
   and distant isolation gave way to containment which, at the start
   of the Cold War meant: X protects Y from Z by means of P for the
   sake of Q

X = United States  
Y = Federal Republic (and West Europe)  
Z = Soviet Empire (and not necessarily Bolshevism)  
P = nuclear strategy (extended deterrence)  
Q = to stall and roll back Soviet expansion  

And given that West-integration was not contingent choice but
necessity, three consequences stand out:

1. Freedom over reunification: particularly Germany’s NATO- membership
   seemed then to many to perpetuate the country’s division – what
   with a German Democratic Republic in the Warsaw Pact.
2. Abdication of foreign policy: in her first decades the Federal
   Republic largely ignored one half of every state’s supreme calling
   – to seek to obtain and sustain for its citizens freedom from
   poverty in prosperity and from alien bondage in security. This
   latter goal demands power, diplomacy, strategy – in short, an
   existential awareness of external affairs. Under the US umbrella
   Germany could afford the luxury of being lukewarm on matters beyond
   her borders. To some extent, this dearth prevails.
3. Restrained sovereignty: restricted sovereignty for forty years has
   left its mark on both citizens and government. One example: as late
   as 1990, Hans Modrow, the then Prime Minister of the dying GDR,
   upon being put the standard question as to what his half of Germany
   would bring to impending unity, stumbled and fumbled, desperately
   looking for an adequate answer, till he finally came up with, “our
   slogan: ‘we are the people’. One wished he had more history. With a
   slightly better grasp of things he could instead have said:
   ‘prospects of unbridled sovereignty for united Germany’.
   
Mr. Modrow was not quite an exception. A sizeable section of post-1990
Germany’s citizens obviously does not realize to this day that the
nation’s sovereignty – and hence responsibility in the world – has
increased; others, who possibly do, seem to find the new state of
affairs embarrassing or deplorable. The very concept ‘nation state’ is
currently one of Germany’s leading taboos. Many would rather drown it
in a new-found sea of euphoria – in a United States of Europe.

With the end of the Cold War, a substantial bit of Germany’s
well-structured world suddenly evaporated. Containment, nurtured to
tackle Soviet explosion into Europe, was caught on the wrong foot at
what came instead – a quick and, no less amazing, non-cataclysmic
implosion in the Soviet Empire. Like the fabled prince who kisses the
beautiful princess back to life and dies thereupon, containment’s very
success was designed to seal its fate. Already it looks distant and
gone for good, leaving behind a forlorn orphan, NATO, to fend for
itself. But to what purpose?

**A Converse Lippmann Gap**

Quoting Walter Lippmann on American foreign policy, Samuel Huntington
once coined the term ’Lippmann Gap’ for naming any serious imbalance
between a nation’s powers and its commitments. This imbalance occurs
when a nation’s ends overtake its means. And unlike the decline in
relative power, Huntington reassured us, the imbalance in policy can
be corrected.

Although the gap can be either way, depending on whether means or ends
are in short supply, Huntington obviously prefers to use the term for
the means-gap since it is usually the more interesting of the too,
being both more common and more destabilizing. Saddam Hussein’s Irak
for instance exemplified a blatant Lippmann-Gap because his country’s
strength fell way short of his aspirations, apparently at least to
usurp Kuwait – if not to become the prime mover in the Arab world. And
the answer to a Lippmann-Gap can only be: stretch your means or curb
your ends.

Viewed thus, post-Cold War Germany is suffering from a Converse
Lippmann-Gap. Unification has of course advanced severe demands upon
the nation’s economy. The homogeneity of German society has shown
strange fissures at the seams. Nevertheless, Germany’s means are
significant and, wisely used, sufficiently elastic to absorb the
current massive stretch. It is rather on the ends-side that the nation
is showing the gap: Germany seems to have suddenly run out of
purpose. Worse, many Germans are quite oblivious of this deficit. They
would rather prefer to nestle in snug certitudes long lost.

Post-war German foreign policy – notwithstanding Ostpolitik, UN
membership etc. – has been a pale affair. Policy implies choice. And
choice requires possibilities. For Germany there has never been an
alternative to the primacy of stable security nor any other way but to
seek this security in the United States and this stability in the
credible(?) threat of mutual extermination. The swift farewell to the
Soviet Union has now also bade farewell to set habits. After a long
pause, Germany must now seek to handle her affairs the way *she*
considers best. It is like the instructor having, after an arduous
trial, handed over the driving licence and got off; novice or not, it
is now up to the driver to deftly manoeuvre his vehicle without
endangering health or property.  Mikhail Gorbachev, unwittingly
perhaps, was a roaring success at making Germany the master of her own
affairs again.

And therefore what for instance former German foreign minister
Hans-Dietrich Genscher so often said – namely, that the essentials of
German foreign policy are set and thus in no need of rethinking – is
gravely faulted. Why? Because at least two factors, so far largely
ignored under the pleasant shelter of the Cold War, have resurfaced
with vigour and are set to determine Germany’s tryst with the external
world: the question of the nation-state and the question of
geography. And for both it is imperative to think afresh, to challenge
stereotypes and to construct an indigenous methodology for the conduct
of policy. Let us throw a glance at each.

**The Nation State**

As for the nation-state, it is indeed no small irony that Germany, the
belated nation, is today the most vociferous enthusiast for some
European supranation. In fact the United States of Europe is a
convenient alibi for a non-existant definition of Germany’s national
interests after the revolutionary changes of the year 1989.

The only sensible way, it is often claimed, to prevent any repetitions
of the German nation’s recent unspeakable crimes is to take leave of
the nation altogether. This attractive solution, namely of cleansing
dirty linen by either getting rid of the linen or by calling it by
another name, invites comments:

First, admittedly, nations as nations have seldom been great
harbingers of peace. Nor, though, have they ever had any monopoly on
genocide or barbarism. How many dogmas, one wonders, how many
religions would, by the same token, have to self-deface? It is quite
questionable whether wars of religion have counted fewer deaths than
war amongst nations, or, say, Stalin’s horrors, perpetuated not the
least in the name of transcending the nation-state, fewer sorrows.

Second, the success of the nation-state in its rather brief career are
significant too: the flowering of modern science, emergence of
democracies, universal education, prosperity for the ordinary citizen.

Third, the tendency, for better or for worse, and both in and out of
Europe today is towards the nation-state’s consolidation or formation,
not its abolition. On the contrary. With the farewell to the Cold War,
fake supranational constructions from the Baltic to the Black Sea have
vanished. Even non-socialist, affluent Europe has seen stateless
minority ‘nations’ restive: Scots in Britain, Catalonians and Basques
in Spain, German-speaking Tyrolleans in Italy. Beyond the façade of
nonchalant nationhood, even Switzerland has had animosity between her
speakers of French and German. And the speakers of Dutch and French in
Belgium have often tossed at one another more than mere verbal
crudities.

Fourth, history supplies ample evidence that the viability of a
certain United States of X is ultimately settled in no small measure
by language. Linguistic homogeneity tends to guarantee a country
robust health, heterogeneity tends to endanger it. Witness in turn,
for instance, the USA and the Soviet Union. (Are there though signs of
this homogeneity in the USA cracking? If so, it may soon demand
greater attention than sundry other tales of decline and deliverance).

Finally, if bellicosity indeed runs so deep in Germans as to call for
supranational shackles, if only mortal distrust binds Europeans, then
surely some day the bonds will slip off leaving as sole consolation
the next grand European carnage being called a civil war of sorts.

**Geography**

It is admittedly absurd to make the point but the truth is: since
1990, Germany is *voluntarily* in the West. Any other state of affairs
will of course beat both probability and prudence. Yet it is more than
a mere tribute to Adenauer to insist that Germany has chosen to
continue where she should be. Choice implies volition. Policy implies
freedom to choose. And choice is a novel element in the biography of
the Federal Republic.

And it is indication of this novel element that for instance some
voices have started worrying, others hoping, that the West’s ‘grip’ on
Germany may slip. Others may consider the question academic, for
Germany it is incendiary. Why?

Indeed, Germany is today ‘free’ to choose between the West and, say,
some ‘United Europe’ as a geographically more ‘natural’ locus of
orientation. This is true, and there’s the rub, quite aside from the
wisdom of yet another venture at ‘neutrality’.

Moreover, this shows too the dilemma that has entered Germany’s
affairs on the heels of choice, the novelty. Since post-war Germany
hardly had any choice, sticking now to old positions like, say, NATO
encourages the mistaken conclusion that Germany continues to have
none. Only time will remove Germany’s lack of familiarity with choice
and only time can convince the world of Germany’s steadfastness and
clarity of vision - presuming they are there. A common argument which
advocates that Germany turn her face elsewhere comes from what might
be called the ‘decontainment school’ and essentially rides the
crescendo of the United States’ alleged ‘decline’ as well as, more
universally, capitalism’s alleged grim future, worlds away from ethics
and compassion.

Even states on occasion handle solely according to the dictates of
ethics. But diffuse moralism is wrong counsel in the affairs of
states. This, quite apart from the fact that Europeans, like people
everywhere else, strive for prosperity and democracy precisely in that
order, that the probability of Russia and a few others retreading the
path of some totalitarianism is not negligible and that neither
Germany nor any other European power can maintain, much less enforce,
peace and stability in the neighbourhood - witness Yugoslavia, Ukraine
and some others – and ought therefore to shun dreams of the kind.

Rather, there are now at least four new ‘threats’, as yet veiled,
which are poised to demand every fabric of Germany’s resilience;
continuing firmly in the West, assuming it is still there, is
necessary but insufficient to countenance these. Geography again. They
are:

1. Political: the possible birth of weakly authoritarian states in the
   East and the South where very often economies are still bereft of
   substance, where stability is unsure, where purpose is uncertain. A
   weird coalition of anti-West crusaders, of disgruntled military
   officers and of a subterranean Neo-Bolshevism in economy and
   society may in the short run throttle nascent democracies.
2. Social: the lifting of the iron curtain, added to perilously
   permeable state borders in and around Germany has, given the
   affluence differential between Germany and most others, set an
   exodus rolling. This has fanned animosity towards aliens in some
   quarters.
3. Military-Diplomatic: since so many countries are in a flux, it is
   futile to seek durable security arrangements of lasting
   significance with most.
4. Economic: it is for instance a fair bet that Russia will ultimately
   tap her enormous riches and arrive at prosperity - unless it
   politically disintegrates. But the journey will be arduous. And the
   amount of initial investments necessary will be horrendous. Large
   conferences on peace, democracy and well-being produce little else
   but humbug. Besides, when it comes to future markets, not Germany
   but Korea, and of course now China, are more likely to reap some
   day a rich Siberian harvest bartering technology for, say, natural
   gas.
   
**What is to be done?**

Which set of beacon lights is likely to provide an optimal strategy
for Germany to manage her fundamental interests - military and
economic - in the next decades?

Security: in the field of pure security Germany has at least three
mutually accommodative avenues open – preservingNATO, constructing a
West-European defence and putting up some form of Collective Security
for Europe.

The term ‘Collective Security’, to start with, is ambiguous and allows
of at least three interpretations:

- (i) Given internal turmoil in a member-state, a set of states
  a,b,c….comes to the rescue of the said member (Prague 1968)
- (ii) Given conflict between members of the set, the organization
  mediates (candidates for CSCE-mediation would be, say, Greece and
  Turkey over Cyprus)
- (iii) Given external aggression, the set comes to the rescue of one
  or more members (in a way the case of Kuwait 1990).

Beyond such ambiguities, Collective Security has severe conceptual
difficulties. Still, the point here being not so much to compare
strategies as to point at possibilities, it should be legitimate to
construct, say, the following hierarchy of priorities for Germany

> NATO > WEU > Franco-German Corps > CSCE

On the face of it, any state invited to share in this spectrum is
fortunate – especially since the elements offered are not mutually
exclusive. The West European Union, for all you are worth, is NATO’s
supposed European pillar; some certain Franco-German Corps may some
day become the heart of the WEU; everyone worth his name is a member
of CSCE.

But there is a snag in the matter. The snag involves the viability of
the several proposals. CSCE is still very much a feast without a
host - quite aside from the wise adage ’everybody’s business is
nobody’s business’. WEU with its common defence policy is claimed to
be a necessity. But is it also achievable – be it in the next years or
at all? A mere Franco-German Corps establishes little – yet. Because
prudence warrants caution – that Germany better not, yet, take leave
of the fundamental assumption that, for France, her supreme concern is
in many ways rather ‘seen in Germany’ than ‘shared with’. And that
this assumption is likely to remain significant in the next
future. And that its validity may very well grow if security is made
to include, as some would have it, ‘geoeconomics’ too.

What is then to be done? How is Germany to achieve and retain stable
security in future?

The right approach seems to lie in the apparent banality of the
dictum: ‘hope and try for the best, prepare for the worst, rule out
nothing prematurely and thwart euphoria’. At any rate, the following -
or a similar - list of possibilities ought certainly to be considered:

1. continue to work for a strong NATO, trimming it of archaic and
   obsolete doctrines, giving it more tensile strength; put greater
   emphasis on mobility, out of area operations, humanitarian support
   and conflict prevention. But all the while do seriously weigh the
   possibility of NATO’s withering away.
2. Simultaneously work at strengthening WEU, particularly the
   cooperation with France. Again, it would be rash here not to take
   into account the chances of the entire project falling flat.
3. try to establish some common security connections with the former
   soviet satellites – avoiding in the process inadvertently causing
   Russia to worry.
4. seriously reflect upon the chances of 1), 2) and 3) all ending in
   failure. In that event, in the aftermath of a receding NATO,
   attempt to establish an ‘Atlantic Bilateralism’ with the USA -–
   perhaps in some ways reminiscent of the Anglo-US Special
   Relationship.
5. Bear in mind that the chances of 4) failing may be even greater
   than the chances of the other three. And in this worst of all
   cases, Germany may even have to reconsider her current axioms of
   deterrence, both conventional and nuclear.

To repeat, the unkindest cut of all this is that Germany must force
herself to consider the eventuality of NATO’s, in its present form and
function, turning defunct – soon. It is very difficult for successful
alliances to survive success. Worse, in NATO’s case, chances are
significant that the United States will leave, if she does, because
her Lippmann Gap at the turn now into the next century is obvious. And
because, contrary claims notwithstanding, her Pacific engagement is
poised to increase, her Atlantic fervour destined to shrink.

**Prosperity**

If on account of some significant improbabilities the preceding
section on Security should suggest an academic exercise, pursuing the
question of preserving Germany’s position on the international scale
of affluence is definitely not. Germany is a medium-sized, fairly
heavily populated, resource-poor country. Its society is well-knit and
has so far been culturally homogeneous; affluence is to a large extent
uniformly distributed, though of course regional as well as income
discrepancies exist.

That post-war Germany attained swift and genuine prosperity in spite
of great devastations is due to at least four factors:

1. Germans’ diligence, discipline and organizational talents
2. continued excellence in the training and performance of skilled
   workers
3. farsighted US policy - no reparations, Marshall Plan, liberal
   import policies etc.
4. a large brain drain to the USA notwithstanding, success at
   maintaining a steady supply of engineers and scientists eminently
   capable of mastering the then forefront technologies - chemicals,
   machine tools, automobiles.

As a result the passage to affluence for all Germans was smooth and
quick. And this affluence is robust. So much so, that the economy has,
everything said and done, managed to cushion the severe initial impact
of unification – the economy of the former GDR having been perfectly
brittle and bottomless. The shock however, though absorbable, has been
great.

Not content with such tumults, Germany’s economy is now confronted
with a challenge from quite different quarters. There is today ample
reason to believe that economic (and therefore, also political?)
pre-eminence, and hence an affluence differential, is shifting fast
from energy-optimizing manufacture to knowledge-maximizing manufacture
like in ceramics, high-speed computers, communication technologies and
genetics. Areas where Germany’s economy, having nearly missed out on
the race, has just joined in but is still trailing. Worse, current
non-forefront sectors of production where Germany has so far led, are
increasingly in danger of being captured by once-threshold, now
thriving industrial economies. No one in Europe’s automobile industry
for instance may feign surprise if Asian competitors happen to make
deep inroads in the market for middle-class cars soon. Worst, German
society is only gradually waking up to the nature and immensity of
this garbed threat. This can some day turn out to be a fatal defect in
the world’s leading trader.

If the German economy is to prevail and retain its present
international position, at least three things must be done:

1. the key to both survival and supremacy in the age of
   knowledge-maximizing manufacture lies in education. Universities,
   research laboratories, banks, large industrial corporations and the
   administration must work here in unison
2. Germany must bring its weight to bear upon the moulding of the
   European Market (assuming it is still mouldable) in a fashion that
   stresses not just the oneness and Europeanness of the market but
   also its freeness (from the prevailing shackles of a defunct
   bureaucracy) and openness.
3. Germany must be bold and iconoclast enough to continue ignoring the
   double-dogma that has dominated economic life for far too long, the
   double-dogma namely, that the state can run the economy best and
   the market thus is superfluous - or vice versa. Instead the state’s
   motto must be: as much over the market as possible, as little
   through the state as necessary. Specifically for the German state
   it must also mean trimming debts, supporting forefront technologies
   and curtailing societal ‘free lunches’.
   
**Germany's Purpose**

Dedicating oneself to the dual task of preserving affluence and
assuring security is nothing specifically and exclusively
German. These are defining criteria for the notion “sovereign
state”. Differences may of course exist in the nature of strategies
that states select toward achieving these goals. But the broad pattern
is universal.

What is new about Germany is that she is, since unification, a
newcomer to the club of major sovereign nation states and that her
geography has bounced back to life and must be considered a matter of
supreme relevance. And this does not contradict legitimate reminders
that have come from various quarters that, notwithstanding Bismarck’s
words (“geography is the sole constant in the affairs of nations”),
Germany for the first time in her history is surrounded not by enemies
but by friends and partners.  Precisely. Enemies alternate between
ruinous wars and nervous peace. But friends may, and do, heartily
quarrel. Neighbours are of no consequence only to those who have none.

Therefore all major principle of dealing with the external world,
principles nurtured in the cosy comfort of the Cold War, should be
rethought. Rethinking is not obliged to mean discarding. But it does
mean putting even the firmest of axioms to question and it does mean
readiness, if need be, to redefine goals and to reset priorities.

How to bridge this Converse Lippmann Gap? For the next years nearly
everything will be open to uncertainties – NATO, European unity,
democratization around the Mediterranean, encountering the threat from
Islamism, the fate of nuclear arsenals in the hands of inscrutable
entities and many more. But two landmarks will neither sway in unsure
winds nor mislead. These are: enlightened Nationalism and the
West. Germany should be wise to stick to both.

Enlightened nationalism ought to attempt several things simultaneously. For instance:

- to endeavour to achieve clarity in matters of strategic significance
  and yet not to forsake of trial and error: eg. to firmly resist
  Russian aggression in the Ukraine while discarding – in view of the
  complexity of the matter – nervous preemtive belligerence.
- to be both intrepid and judicious: eg. by sternly protesting
  against, say, the Chines position in South China Sea and encouraging
  ever broader trade relations with China
- to be for both fraternity as well as specific self-interest: eg. by,
  say, supporting a single - and free - European Market and by, say,
  at the same time banishing in the next years a maximum of
  long-distance lorries from the highways to the railways lest the
  Single European Market otherwise unleash an avalanche of
  asphalt-borne transport submerging the centre of Europe - Germany
- to be neither dogmatic nor naive: eg. in matters, of say,
  controlling the huge exodus of prospective emigrants from, for
  instance, impoverished Rumania or ravaged Africa by both shedding
  sacrosanct reservations against, say, proposed constitutional
  amendments on political asylum and at the same time jettisoning
  undue confidence that the mere amending will elevate this matter –
  namely of Germany, and only Germany, being swamped by a great inflow
  of desperate humanity - to the status of a burning question in Rome,
  Paris or Prague. It will not.

And finally to the West that post-1990s Germany is being so warmly
recommended in the present essay to continue to be firmly in. Where
does it lie?

Germany, in her incapacity to handle her geography, brought ever so
often boundless tragedy upon herself and her neighbours. Then, in
1945, the high offices of destiny finally carried her west. Now,
seventy years hence, at a moment when the great antagonist Soviet
Union has long faded, the Federal Republic is a normal, secure western
state. Without this unexciting but vital correction it would have been
impossible for her in 1990 to physically swing east and become one
again. Her infrastructure, economy, political affairs, culture and
society are thoroughly amalgamated with the rest of the western
world. Today, any significant discussion of Germany’s being in the
West may - and must - therefore take leave of bare physical geography
and turn to another, more abstract, aspect.

The West is ultimately an idea whose compass includes more than Europe
or America. The idea has evolved through millennia while the primary
seat of power and prosperity in the world has gradually shifted from
Mesopotamia to Egypt to the Mediterranean to the Atlantic. As to
whether some day it will move to the Pacific is speculation. But it
very well may.

Two features mark out this currently dominant Atlantic Culture –
inductive reasoning and constructive scepticism. Of the two, inductive
reasoning, which dwells at the heart of modern science, is the
Atlantic’s mediterranean inheritance. The other, scepticism, is an
attitude toward problem-solving that, though by no means exclusively,
is in its daily practice quite typically Anglo-Saxon. It is scepticism
that makes dogma give way to common sense, orthodoxy to inquiry,
radicalism to a trial and error approach. It is the spirit that dares
to call the continental intellect’s favourite dichotomy, rationalism
vs. empiricism, bogus. It reminds its Cartesians that ‘pure reason’
bereft of objective experience is a phantom; and it reminds its
positivists that the world of the concrete divorced from the world of
the concept is a myth. A free, peacful and prosperous Germany has need
of both.
